MSC2249: Require users to have visibility on an event when submitting reports (#2249)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/2249-report-require-joined.md

# MSC2249: Require users to have visibility on an event when submitting reports

The [report API](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.5.0#post-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-report-eventid)
currently does not require users to be joined to the room in order to report that an
event is inappropriate. This allows anyone to report any event in any room  without being joined to the room.
There is limited use (and scope for abuse) for users to call report on rooms they are not joined to,
so this proposal requires that reporting users must be joined to a room before they can report an event.

Furthermore this proposal addresses the case where the user may not have visibility
on an event (e.g. not being able to read history in a room).

In that case, similar logic applies as described below.

## Proposal

The `/rooms/{roomId}/report/{eventId}` endpoint should check to see if the authenticated user
is joined to the room in the current state of the room. If the user is not joined to the room OR
the room does not exist, the server should respond with:

```json
{

>     "errcode": "M_FORBIDDEN",

Reviewer: Synapse has decided to use `M_NOT_FOUND`/404 for both errors, which sounds equally correct.

https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/13779

Author: works for me!

> The `/rooms/{roomId}/report/{eventId}` endpoint should check to see if the authenticated user
> is joined to the room in the current state of the room. If the user is not joined to the room OR
> the room does not exist, the server should respond with:
> 
> ```json
> {
>     "errcode": "M_FORBIDDEN",
>     "error": "The room does not exist, or you are not joined to the room."
> }
> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
The `/rooms/{roomId}/report/{eventId}` endpoint should check to see if the authenticated user
is joined to the room in any point of history that the user could retrieve the event to be reported.
the room does not exist, the server should respond with:

```json
{
    "errcode": "M_FORBIDDEN",
    "error": "The room does not exist, or you could not have seen the event in question."
}
```
````

Author: So the reason for this requirement is that:
- I couldn't think of a valid use case to report an event of a room you've left/been banned from
- In theory most impls will be caching the latest membership, so it's a useful short circuit to avoid spelunking the history of the room to find out if you were joined 10 years ago.

There might be an argument that you want to report an event in a room you were kicked/banned from, but it feels like a useful report coming out of that situation is likely to be low. If enough people are in favor, we could make it up to the impl to decide at what level they would accept reports from.

Reviewer 2: > There might be an argument that you want to report an event in a room you were kicked/banned from, but it feels like a useful report coming out of that situation is likely to be low.

I personally experienced such an issue. Can DM you the details.

Author: Well, the details aren't so important but if it's a common use case that you want to report events that you can *no longer* read then perhaps the short circuit isn't worth the trouble.

MUST be sent regardless if the room exists or not as this endpoint could be used as a way to brute
force room IDs in order to find a room.

If the user is joined to the room, but the event doesn't exist on the homeserver OR the user doesn't have permission to see
the event then the response should be:

```json
{
    "errcode": "M_FORBIDDEN",
    "error": "The event does not exist, or you do not have permission to see it."
}
```

It is not expected for homeservers to attempt to backfill an event they cannot find locally, as the user is unlikely to
have seen an event that the homeserver has not yet stored.

If the event is redacted, reports MAY still be allowed depending on the implementation. There is an argument that
a redeacted event should still be reportable as even deleted abusive content was harmful at a point.

## Tradeoffs

None

## Potential issues

This will incur a performance penalty on the endpoint as the homeserver now needs to query state in the room, however
this is considered acceptable given the potential to reduce abuse of the endpoint.

## Security considerations

> Care should be taken not to give away information inadvertently by responding different error codes depending

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Care should be taken not to give away information inadvertently by responding with different error codes depending
```
